oh hello everybody its William and
that's October 31st it's Halloween night
all the little halloweeners are out
running around doing their
trick-or-treat thing but anyway here
it's a big night here this is what we're
going to light up the Glenwood for the
season so after we get it lit we're
going to party like it's 1899 so sort of
dress for the occasion let me take my
hat and coat off
and we'll get the stove fired up all
right now this year normally how to
start the fire is I collect you know
typical wood shavings kindling wood
paper cardboard whatever to start the
fire however this year in order to
preserve my glass and keep it nice and
clean some of my cohorts on the cold
forum the NEPA Crossroads comm suggested
I try charcoal so I went out to the
local Walmart today involved the last
couple of bags of charcoal and I can't
believe it the Christmas stuff is out
already it's not even Halloween but
anyway what we've done here let me grab
the flashlight is I put some of this in
here you can see it's that chunk
charcoal some briquettes it's the
natural chunk charcoal that's what was
recommended that I use and we're going
to start it this way what I'm going to
do we're doing this together for the
first time I've never done this before
so we'll see how well it works so what
I'm going to do here the other goal is
to keep my sleeves clean and start the
fire
please so we put around the charcoal a
source of coal this is nuts I'd normally
I use Stowe sighs there's a few pieces
of stove in but the parlor stove
upstairs takes this sighs have yet to
order my stove coal for this so but this
part is that we'll see how this works
so put a little circle of coal around
the charcoal and see how that works make
sure my dampers open the pipe dampers
open the base burners in direct draft
will open the primary dances all the way
and I guess the Glenwood gets to start
off the party cause she gets a double
shot of kerosene two shots of kerosene
to start off her lap her heating said
you care so before this slowly on the
charcoal you pour too fast it just runs
off but you want to pour it slow enough
that the kerosene or whatever lighter
fluid whatever soaks into the charcoal
so the like night there we go
so there is to that and we will remove
the jug of kerosene away from the fire
here and let me grab my matches
whoops
I'll see how that goes
give it a little secondary air and off
we go I will say how well this works
let's see how much time we've got here I
got a couple minutes so what I wanted to
do while this is starting up
yeah it's drawing just fine what I
wanted to talk to you about is something
I forgot to tell you about the other day
when I was going over the features I'm
so busy trying to go over all the
details I forgot the main aspect and the
design of the stove and that's the
overall shape of it as you notice it's
tall and round versus short and square
like today's coal stoves so the reason
this is done this way
if you've ever read about how combustion
works on various fuels you have
basically three components you have
carbon give hydrocarbons that's what you
see burning right that's hydrocarbons
that's the gaseous part of the fuel and
then you have inert matter which comes
out as leftovers ash after the carbon
and hydrocarbons are burned anthracite
coal is mostly carbon over 80% but
however it still has a lot of volatile
gases and hydrocarbons and the stove is
shaped this way for the ideal combustion
of coal the firebox is conical as you
can see you know it's shaped it's deep
and it's narrow coal in order to burn
properly has to be compacted together
because in order for it to maintain
combustion you have to have a certain
temperature and the coal pieces bunched
together helps maintain the temperature
above the ignition level of the coal
coal ignites at a pretty high
temperature the hydrocarbons in coal
ignite at around noon I think 1200 1500
degrees they burn off to carbon monoxide
and at 1800 they burn off the water
panda carbon dioxide
however in a naturally aspirated stove
natural draft the best you're going to
get is burned you know to carbon
monoxide you have to have a forest draft
to get that kind of combustion to to
burn it to hydrocarbons so anyway the
second thing here is this big part here
do you want to why do they have all this
space over the fire pot the top of the
fire pot is right here the second
ingredient to good combustion is an
adequate supply of air and air has to be
admitted in the right proportion and at
the right temperature for perfect
combustion to occur these stoves allow
enough space over the fire for the gases
and the air to mix in a proportion
necessary to get proper combustion the
old formula is is that the combustion
chamber needs to be more than twice the
height that the firebox is deep or wide
and this is almost exactly it's a little
bit higher twice the height of the
depths of the firebox so the mass of
fuel according to the old formula has to
have this much space over for adequate
combustion and that's a little lesson on
combustion right now and what we're
going to do is we're going to let this
go and we're going to pause the video
and come back in a few minutes and we'll
see how well the coals ignited so we're
going to see how this works at the same
time anyway we'll see in a little bit
and look forward to seeing you then